storage: add storage network settings (#194)
harvester/docs: docs/storagenetwork/storagenetwork.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: Storage Network
title: ""
---

# Storage Network

> Harvester uses Longhorn as the default storage plugin to provide VM and pod volumes. In case users expect to isolate Longhorn replication traffic from the Kubernetes cluster network or other network workloads. Users can assign a dedicated network for Longhorn replication traffic for dedicated network bandwidth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Harvester uses Longhorn as its built-in storage system to provide block device volumes for VMs and Pods. If the user wishes to isolate Longhorn replication traffic from the Kubernetes cluster network (i.e. the management network) or other cluster-wide workloads. Users can allocate a dedicated storage network for Longhorn replication traffic to get better network bandwidth and performance.
```

For more informations, please refer [Longhorn Storage Network](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.3.2/advanced-resources/deploy/storage-network/)

:::note

> We always recommend using Harvester Storage Network setting instead of Longhorn Storage Network setting directly. Manual configuration in the Longhorn setting might confuse the determinations of the Harvester controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuring Longhorn settings directly is not recommended, as this can lead to untested situations.
```

:::

## Prerequisites

There are some prerequisites before configuring the Harvester Storage Network setting.

- Well-configured Cluster Network and VLAN Config
    - Users have to ensure the Cluster Network is configured and VLAN Config will cover all nodes and ensure the network connectivity is working and expected in all nodes. 
- All VMs should be stopped.
    - We recommend checking the VM status with the following command and should get an empty result.
    - `kubectl get -A vmi`
- All pods that are attached to Longhorn Volumes should be stopped.
    - Users could skip this step with the Harvester Storage Network setting. Harvester will stop Longhorn-related pods automatically.

## Configuration Example

> - IP range for Storage Network
> 	- IP range should not conflict or overlap with Kubernetes cluster networks.
> 	- IP range should be IPv4 CIDR format and 4 times the number of your cluster nodes. Longhorn will use 2 IPs per node and the upgrade process will run two versions of Longhorn simultaneously. It will consume 4 IPs per node in the upgrade process.
> 	- If your cluster has 250 nodes, the IP range should be larger than /22.
> - Well-configured Cluster Network and VLAN Config
> 	- Please refer Networking page for more details and configure `Cluster Network` and `VLAN Config` but not `Networks`.
> - VLAN ID
> 	- Please check with your network switch setting, and provide a dedicated VLAN ID for Storage Network
> 
> We will take the following configuration as an example to explain the details of the Storage Network
> 
> - IP range: `192.168.0.0/24`
> - Cluster Network: `storage`
> - VLAN ID for Storage Network: `100`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- VLAN ID
	- Please check with your network switch setting, and provide a dedicated VLAN ID for Storage Network
- Well-configured Cluster Network and VLAN Config
	- Please refer Networking page for more details and configure `Cluster Network` and `VLAN Config` but not `Networks`.
- IP range for Storage Network
	- IP range should not conflict or overlap with Kubernetes cluster networks(both `10.42.0.0/16` and `10.43.0.0/16` are reserved).
	- IP range should be IPv4 CIDR format and 4 times the number of your cluster nodes. Longhorn will use 2 IPs per node, and the upgrade process will run two versions of Longhorn simultaneously. It will consume 4 IPs per node in the upgrade process.
	- If your cluster has 250 nodes, the IP range should be larger than `/22`.

We will take the following configuration as an example to explain the details of the Storage Network

- VLAN ID for Storage Network: `100`
- Cluster Network: `storage`
- IP range: `192.168.0.0/24`
```

## Configuration Process

> Harvester will create Multus NetworkAttachmentDefintion from the configuration, stop pods related to Longhorn Volume, update Longhorn setting, and restart previous pods.

Reviewer 2: Is Multus a term I'm not aware of or is it Multi?
```suggestion
Harvester will create Multus NetworkAttachmentDefinition from the configuration, stop pods related to Longhorn Volume, update Longhorn setting, and restart previous pods.
```

Author: Multus is a term
https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni

### Before Applying Harvester Storage Network Setting

Here we have two cases.
- Expect that VM VLAN traffic and Longhorn Storage Network use the same group of physical interfaces.
- Expect that VM VLAN traffic and Longhorn Storage Network use different physical interfaces.

Longhorn will send replication traffic through the specific interfaces shown as the red line in the figure.

#### Same Physical Interfaces

Take `eth2` and `eth3` as an example for VM VLAN traffic and Longhorn Storage Network simultaneously.

> Please refer Networking page to configure `ClusterNetwork` and `VLAN Config` with `eth2` and `eth3` and remember the `ClusterNetwork` name for the further step.

Reviewer: let's add the related doc link once the network page is ready, thanks.

> ![storagenetwork-same.png](./storagenetwork-same.png)

Reviewer: since this is a bond so both `eth2` and `eth3` could be used by the storage network instead `eth3` only?

Author: Both will be used.
It depends on bond mode.
let me update figures for bonding

Author: update figure with bonding.
this should not confuse again

#### Different Physical Interfaces

`eth2` and `eth3` are for VM VLAN Traffic. `eth4` and `eth5` are for Longhorn Storage Network.

Please refer Networking page to configure `ClusterNetwork` and `VLAN Config` with `eth4` and `eth5` for Storage Network and remember the `ClusterNetwork` name for the further step.

![storagenetwork-diff.png](./storagenetwork-diff.png)

### Harvester Storage Network Setting

> Harvester Storage Network setting will need `range`, `clusterNetwork`, `vlan` field to construct Multus NetworkAttachmentDefintion for Storage Network usage. You could apply this setting via Web UI or CLI.

Reviewer 2: Can we standardize the capitalization of clusterNetwork? It should be either ClusterNetwork or clusterNetwork or clusternetwork.

Author: in the setting, "clusterNetwork" here is the JSON entry name that is case-sensitive.
Other parts will be the concept name or CR name

> Harvester Storage Network setting will need `range`, `clusterNetwork`, `vlan` field to construct Multus NetworkAttachmentDefintion for Storage Network usage. You could apply this setting via Web UI or CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Harvester Storage Network setting will need `range`, `clusterNetwork`, `vlan` field to construct Multus NetworkAttachmentDefinition for Storage Network usage. You could apply this setting via Web UI or CLI.
```

#### Web UI

Harvester Storage Network setting could be easily modified on the `Settings > storage-network` page.

![storagenetwork-ui.png](./storagenetwork-ui.png)

#### CLI

Users could use this command to edit Harvester Storage Network setting.

```bash
kubectl edit settings.harvesterhci.io storage-network
```

The value format is JSON string or empty string as shown in below.

```json
{
    "vlan": 100,
	"clusterNetwork": "storage",
	"range": "192.168.0.0/24"
}
```

The full configuration will be like this example.

```yaml
apiVersion: harvesterhci.io/v1beta1
kind: Setting
metadata:
  name: storage-network
value: '{"vlan":100,"clusterNetwork":"storage","range":"192.168.0.0/24"}'
```

:::caution

> Because of the design, Harvester will treat as different configurations, even JSON string is added or removed additional and insignificant characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the design, Harvester will treat extra and insignificant characters in JSON string as a different configuration.
```

:::

### After Applying Harvester Storage Network Setting

> After applying Harvester Storage Network setting, Harvester will stop all pods that are related to Longhorn Volumes. Currently, Harvester has some pods listed below that will be stopped during setting.

Reviewer 2: Unnecessary capitalization. 
```suggestion
After applying Harvester's Storage Network setting, Harvester will stop all pods that are related to Longhorn volumes. Currently, Harvester has some pods listed below that will be stopped during setting.
```

- Prometheus
- Grafana
- Alertmanager
- VM Import Controller

> Harvester will also create a new NetworkAttachmentDefintion and update Longhorn Storage Network setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Harvester will also create a new NetworkAttachmentDefinition and update the Longhorn Storage Network setting.
```
